THE CUSTOM HOUSE PART II. INTRODUCTORY TO THE SCARLET LETTER.
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain. For further
information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
THE CUSTOM HOUSE PART II. INTRODUCTORY TO THE SCARLET LETTER.
Such were some of the people with whom I now found myself connected. I took it in good
part at the hands of Providence that I was thrown into a position so little akin to my
of toil and impracticable schemes with the dreamy brethren of Brook Farm, after living
for three years within the subtile influence of an intellect like Emerson's, after those
wild free days on the Assebeth indulging fantastic speculations beside our fires of fallen boughs,
with Ellery Channing, after talking with Thorough about pine trees and Indian relics in his
After growing fastidious by sympathy with the classic refinement of Hillard's culture,
after becoming imbued with poetic sentiment at Longfellow's Hearthstone, it was time at
length that I should exercise other faculties of my nature and nourish myself with food
for which I had hitherto had little appetite. Even the old inspector was desirable as a
I looked upon it as an evidence in some measure of a system naturally well balanced and lacking
no essential part of a thorough organisation, that with such associates to remember I could
mingle at once with men of altogether different qualities and never murmur at the change.
Literature, its exertions and objects, were now of little moment in my regard. I cared
not at this period for books, they were apart from me. Nature, except it were human nature,
the nature that is developed in earth and sky, was in one sense hidden from me, and
all the imaginative delight wherewith it had been spiritualised passed away out of my mind.
A gift, a faculty, if it had not departed, was suspended and inanimate within me. There
would have been something sad and unutterably dreary in all this had I not been conscious
that it lay at my own option to recall whatever was valuable in the past. It might be true
indeed that this was a life which could not, with impunity, be lived too long, else it
might make me permanently other than I had been, without transforming me into any shape
which it would be worth my while to take. But I never considered it as other than a
transitory life. There was always a prophetic instinct, a low whisper in my ear, that within
no long period and whenever a new change of custom should be essential to my good, a change
would come.
Meanwhile, there I was, a surveyor of the revenue, and so far as I have been able to
understand as good a surveyor as need be. A man of thought, fancy and sensibility, had
only ten times the surveyor's proportion of those qualities, may at any time be a man
of affairs, if he will only choose to give himself the trouble. My fellow officers and
the merchants and sea captains with whom my official duties brought me into any manner
of connection, viewed me in no other light and probably knew me in no other character.
None of them, I presume, had ever read a page of my indicting, or would have cared a fig
them more for me, if they had read them all. Nor would it have mended the matter in the
least had those same unprofitable pages been written with a pen like that of Burns or of
Chaucer, each of whom was a custom house officer in his day as well as I. It is a good lesson,
though it may often be a hard one, for a man who has dreamt of literary fame and of making
rank among the world's dignitaries by such means, to step aside out of the narrow circle in which
his claims are recognised, and to find how utterly devoid of significance, beyond that circle,
is all that he achieves and all he aims at. I know not that I especially needed the lesson,
either in the way of warning or rebuke, but at any rate I learnt it thoroughly. Nor, it gives me
pleasure to reflect, did the truth, as it came home to my perception, ever cost me a pang,
or require to be thrown off in a sigh. In the way of literary talk, it is true the naval officer,
an excellent fellow who came into office with me and went out only a little later,
would often engage me in a discussion about one or the other of his favourite topics,
Napoleon or Shakespeare. The collector's junior clerk, too, a young gentleman who,
it was whispered, occasionally covered a sheet of Uncle Sam's letter-paper with what,
at the distance of a few yards, looked very much like poetry, used now and then to speak to me of
books, as matters with which I might possibly be conversant. This was my all-of-lettered intercourse,
and it was quite sufficient for my necessities. No longer seeking nor caring that my name should
be blazoned abroad on title pages, I smiled to think that it had now another kind of vogue.
The custom-house marker imprinted it, with a stencil and black paint, on pepper-bags and
baskets of annatto and cigar-boxes and bales of all kinds of dutyable merchandise, in testimony
that these commodities had paid the impost and gone regularly through the office.
Born on such queer vehicle of fame, a knowledge of my existence, so far as a name conveys it,
was carried where it had never been before, and I hope will never go again.
But the past was not dead. Once in a great while the thoughts, that had seemed so vital and so
effective, yet had been put to rest so quietly, revived again. One of the most remarkable
occasions when the habit of bygone days awoke in me was that which brings it within the law
of literary propriety to offer the public the sketch which I am now writing.
In the second story of the custom-house there is a large room in which the brickwork and
naked rafters have never been covered with panelling and plaster. The edifice,
originally projected on a scale adapted to the old commercial enterprise of the port,
and with an idea of subsequent prosperity destined never to be realised,
contains far more space than its occupants know what to do with.
This airy hall, therefore, over the collector's apartments, remains unfinished to this day,
and in spite of the aged cobwebs that festoon its dusky beams, appears still to await the labour of
carpenter and mason. At one end of the room, in a recess, were a number of barrels, piled
one upon another, containing bundles of official documents. Large quantities of similar rubbish
lay lumbering the floor. It was sorrowful to think how many days and weeks and months and years of
toil had been wasted on these musty papers, which were now only an encumbrance on earth,
and were hidden away in this forgotten corner, never more to be glanced at by human eyes.
But then what reams of other manuscripts, filled not with the dullness of official formalities,
but with the thought of inventive brains and the rich effusion of deep hearts,
had gone equally to oblivion, and that, moreover, without serving a purpose in their day,
as these heaped-up papers had, and, saddest of all, without purchasing for their writers
the comfortable livelihood which the clerks of the Custom House had gained by these worthless
scratchings of the pen. Yet not altogether worthless, perhaps, as materials of local history.
Here, no doubt, statistics of the former commerce of Salem might be discovered,
and memorials of her princely merchants, old King Derby, old Billy Grey, old Simon Forrester,
and many another magnate in his day, whose powdered head, however, was scarcely in the tomb before
his mountain pile of wealth began to dwindle. The founders of the greater part of the families
which now composed the aristocracy of Salem might here be traced from the petty and obscure
beginning of their traffic, at periods generally much posterior to the Revolution,
upward to what their children look upon as long-established rank. Prior to the Revolution
there is a dearth of records, the earlier documents and archives of the Custom House
having, probably, been carried off to Halifax, when all the King's officials accompanied the
British army in its flight from Boston. It has often been a matter of regret with me,
for going back, perhaps, to the days of the Protectorate, those papers must have contained
many references to forgotten or remembered men, and to antique customs, which would have affected
me with the same pleasure as when I used to pick up Indian arrowheads in the field near the old
manse. But one idle and rainy day, it was my fortune to make a discovery of some little
interest, poking and burrowing into the heaped-up rubbish in the corner, unfolding one and another
document, and reading the names of vessels that had long ago founded at sea or rotted at the
wharves, and those of merchants never heard of now on change, nor very readily decipherable on
their mossy tombstones. Glancing at such matters with the saddened, weary, half-reluctant interests
which we bestow on the corpse of dead activity, and exerting my fancy, sluggish with little use,
to raise up from these dry bones an image of the old town's brighter aspect when India was a new
region, and only Salem knew the way thither, I chanced to lay my hand on a small package carefully
done up in a piece of ancient yellow parchment. This envelope had the air of an official record
of some period long past when clerks engrossed their stiff and formal chirography on more
substantial materials than at present. There was something about it that quickened an instinctive
curiosity, and made me undo the faded red tape that tied up the package, with the sense that
a treasure would here be brought to light. Unbending the rigid folds of the parchment cover,
I found it to be a commission, under the hand and seal of Governor Shirley, in favour of one
Jonathan Pugh, the Surveyor of His Majesty's Customs for the Port of Salem, in the province of
Massachusetts Bay. I remembered to have read, probably in Felt's Annals, a notice of the
decease of Mr. Surveyor Pugh about four score years ago, and likewise in a newspaper of recent
account of the digging up of his remains in the little graveyard of St. Peter's Church during
the renewal of that edifice. Nothing, if I rightly call to mind, was left of my respected predecessor,
save an imperfect skeleton, and some fragments of apparel, and a wig of majestic frizzle,
which, unlike the head that it once adorned, was in very satisfactory preservation.
But on examining the papers, which the parchment commission served to envelop,
I found more traces of Mr. Pugh's mental part, and the internal operations of his head,
than the frizzled wig had contained of the venerable skull itself.
They were documents, in short, not official, but of a private nature, or at least written
in his private capacity, and apparently with his own hand. I could account for their being
included in the heap of custom-house lumber, only by the fact that Mr. Pugh's death had
happened suddenly, and that these papers, which he probably kept in his official desk,
had never come to the knowledge of his heirs, or were supposed to relate to the business of
the revenue. On the transfer of the archives to Halifax, this package, proving to be of no
public concern, was left behind, and had remained ever since unopened.
The ancient surveyor, being little molested, I suppose, at that early day, with business
pertaining to his office, seems to have devoted some of his many leisure hours to researches
as a local antiquarian, and other inquisitions of a similar nature. These supplied material for
petty activity to a mind that would otherwise have been eaten up with rust. A portion of his
entitled main street included in the present volume. The remainder may perhaps be applied
to purposes equally valuable hereafter, or not impossibly may be worked up, so far as they go,
into a regular history of Salem, should my veneration for the natal soil ever impel me
to so pious a task. Meanwhile they shall be at the command of any gentleman inclined and competent
to take the unprofitable labour off my hands.
As a final disposition I contemplate depositing them with the Essex Historical Society.
But the object that most drew my attention in the mysterious package
was a certain affair of fine red cloth, much worn and faded. There were traces about it
of gold embroidery, which, however, was greatly frayed and defaced, so that none or very little
of the glitter was left. It had been wrought, as was easy to perceive, with wonderful skill
of needlework, and the stitch, as I am assured by ladies conversant with such mysteries,
gives evidence of a now forgotten art, not to be recovered even by the process of picking out the
threads. This rag of scarlet cloth, for time and wear, and a sacrilegious moth, had reduced it to
little other than a rag, on careful examination assumed the shape of a letter. It was the capital
letter A. By an accurate measurement, each limb proved to be precisely three inches and a quarter
in length. It had been intended, there could be no doubt, as an ornamental article of dress,
but how it was to be worn, or what rank, honour and dignity in by-pass times were signified by it,
was a riddle which, so evanescent are the fashions of the world in these particulars,
I saw little hope of solving. And yet it strangely interested me. My eyes fastened themselves upon
the old scarlet letter, and would not be turned aside. Certainly there was some deep meaning in
it, most worthy of interpretation, and which, as it were, streamed forth from the mystic symbol,
subtly communicating itself to my sensibilities, but evading the analysis of my mind.
While thus perplexed and cogitating among other hypotheses whether the letter might not have been
one of those decorations which the white men used to contrive in order to take the eyes of Indians,
I happened to place it on my breast. It seemed to me, the reader may smile, but must not doubt my
It seemed to me, then, that I experienced a sensation not altogether physical, yet almost so,
as of burning heat, and as if the letter were not of red cloth, but red-hot iron.
I shuddered, and involuntarily let it fall upon the floor.
In the absorbing contemplation of the scarlet letter, I had hitherto neglected to examine a
small roll of dingy paper around which it had been twisted. This I now opened, and had the
satisfaction to find, recorded by the old surveyor's pen, a reasonably complete explanation of the whole
affair. There were several full-scap sheets containing many particulars respecting the life
and conversation of one Hester Prynne, who appeared to have been rather a noteworthy
in the view of our ancestors. She had flourished during a period between the early days of
Massachusetts and the close of the seventeenth century. Aged persons, alive in the time of Mr
Surveyor Pugh, and from whose oral testimony he had made up his narrative, remembered her in their
youth as a very old but not decrepit woman, of a stately and solemn aspect. It had been her habit,
from an almost immemorial date, to go about the country as a kind of voluntary nurse,
and doing whatever miscellaneous good she might, taking upon herself likewise to give advice in
all matters, especially those of the heart. By which means, as a person of such propensities
inevitably must, she gained from many people the reverence due to an angel, but, I should imagine,
was looked upon by others as an intruder and a nuisance. Prying farther into the manuscript,
I found the record of other doings and sufferings of this singular woman, for the most of which the
reader is referred to the story entitled The Scarlet Letter, and it should be borne carefully
in mind that the main facts of that story are authorised and authenticated by the document of
Pugh. The original papers, together with the scarlet letter itself, a most curious relic,
are still in my possession, and shall be freely exhibited to whomsoever, induced by the great
interest of the narrative, may desire a sight of them. I must not be understood as affirming,
that in the dressing up of the tale, and imagining the motives and modes of passion that influence
the characters who figure in it, I have invariably confined myself within the limits of the old
surveyor's half a dozen sheets of full scap. On the contrary, I have allowed myself, as to such
points, nearly or altogether as much licence as if the facts had been entirely of my own invention.
What I contend for is the authenticity of the outline. This incident recalled my mind in some
degree to its old track. There seemed to be here the groundwork of a tale. It impressed me as if the
ancient surveyor, in his garb of a hundred years gone by, and wearing his immortal wig, which was
buried with him, but did not perish in the grave, had met me in the deserted chamber of the custom
house. In his port was the dignity of one who had borne his majesty's commission, and who was
therefore illuminated by a ray of the splendour that shone so dazzlingly about the throne. How
unlike, alas, the hang-dog look of a republican official, who, as the servant of the people,
feels himself less than the least, and below the lowest of his masters. With his own ghostly hand,
the obscurely seen but majestic figure had imparted to me the scarlet symbol, and the little role of
the planetary manuscript. With his own ghostly voice he had exhorted me on the sacred consideration
of my filial duty and reverence towards him, who might reasonably regard himself as my official
ancestor, to bring his mouldy and moth-eaten lucubrations before the public.
Do this, said the ghost of Mr. Surveyor Pugh emphatically, nodding the head that looked so
imposing within its memorable wig. Do this, and the profit shall be all your own. You will shortly
need it, for it is not in your days as it was in mine, when a man's office was a life-lease,
and often times an heirloom. But I charge you, in this matter of old mistress Prynne, give to your
predecessor's memory the credit which will be rightfully its due. And I said to the ghost of
Mr. Surveyor Pugh, I will. On Hester Prynne's story, therefore, I bestowed much thought.
It was the subject of my meditations for many an hour, while pacing to and fro across my room,
or traversing with a hundred-fold repetition the long extent from the front door of the custom
house to the side entrance and back again. Great were the weariness and annoyance of the old
inspector, and the wares and gauges, whose slumbers were disturbed by the unmercifully
lengthened tramp of my passing and returning footsteps. Remembering their own former habits,
they used to say that the Surveyor was walking the quarter-deck. They probably fancied that my sole
object, and indeed the sole object for which a sane man could ever put himself into voluntary
motion, was to get an appetite for dinner. And to say the truth, an appetite, sharpened by the
east wind that generally blew along the passage, was the only valuable result of so much indefatigable
exercise. So little adapted is the atmosphere of a custom house to the delicate harvest of fancy
and sensibility that had I remained there through ten presidencies yet to come, I doubt whether the
scarlet letter would ever have been brought before the public eye. My imagination was a tarnished
mirror. It would not reflect, or only with miserable dimness, the figures with which I did my best to
people it. The characters of the narrative would not be warmed and rendered malleable by any heat
that I could kindle at my intellectual forge. They would take neither the glow of passion nor the
tenderness of sentiment, but retained all the rigidity of dead corpses, and stared me in the
face with a fixed and ghastly grin of contemptuous defiance. What have you to do with us? that
expression seemed to say. The little power you might once have possessed over the tribe of
unrealities is gone. You have bartered it for a pittance of the public gold. Go then and earn
your wages. In short, the almost torpid creatures of my own fancy twitted me with imbecility,
and not without fair occasion. It was not merely during the three hours and a half which Uncle Sam
claimed as his share of my daily life that this wretched numbness held possession of me.
It went with me on my seashore walks and rambles into the country. Whenever, which was seldom and
reluctantly, I bestirred myself to seek that invigorating charm of nature, which used to give
me such freshness and activity of thought the moment that I stepped across the threshold of
the old manse. The same torpor as regarded the capacity for intellectual effort accompanied me
home and weighed upon me in the chamber which I most absurdly termed my study. Nor did it quit me
when late at night I sat in the deserted parlour, lighted only by the glimmering coal fire and the
moon, striving to picture forth imaginary scenes which the next day might flow out on the brightening
page in many-hued description. If the imaginative faculty refused to act at such an hour, it might
well be deemed a hopeless case. Moonlight in a familiar room, falling so white upon the carpet
and showing all its figures so distinctly, making every object so minutely visible yet so unlike a
morning or noontide visibility, is a medium the most suitable for a romance writer to get acquainted
with his elusive guests. There is the little domestic scenery of the well-known apartment,
the chairs with each its separate individuality, the centre table sustaining a work basket, a volume
or two, and an extinguished lamp. The sofa, the bookcase, the picture on the wall, all these
details so completely seen are so spiritualised by the unusual light that they seem to lose their
actual substance and become things of intellect. Nothing is too small or too trifling to undergo
this change and acquire dignity thereby. A child's shoe, the doll seated in her little wicker carriage,
the hobby-horse, whatever in a word has been used or played with during the day,
is now invested with a quality of strangeness and remoteness, though still almost as vividly present
as by daylight. Thus, therefore, the floor of our familiar room has become a neutral territory
somewhere between the real world and fairyland, where the actual and the imaginary may meet,
and each imbue itself with the nature of the other. Ghosts might enter here without affrighting
us. It would be too much in keeping with the scene to excite surprise were we to look about
us and discover a form, beloved but gone hence, now sitting quietly in a streak of this magic
moonshine, with an aspect that would make us doubt whether it had returned from afar
or had never once stirred from our fireside. The somewhat dim coal-fire has an essential
influence in producing the effect which I would describe. It throws its unobtrusive tinge
throughout the room with a faint ruddiness upon the walls and ceiling and a reflected gleam from
the polish of the furniture. This warmer light mingles itself with the cold spirituality of the
and communicates, as it were, a heart and sensibilities of human tenderness
to the forms which fancy summons up. It converts them from snow images into men and women.
Glancing at the looking-glass, we behold, deep within its haunted verge, the smouldering glow
of the half-extinguished anthracite, the white moonbeams on the floor, and a repetition of all
gleam and shadow of the picture, with one removed farther from the actual and nearer
to the imaginative. Then, at such an hour, and with this scene before him, if a man sitting
all alone cannot dream strange things and make them look like truth, he need never try to write
romances. But for myself, during the whole of my custom-house experience, moonlight and sunshine
and the glow of firelight were just alike in my regard, and neither of them was of one wit more
availed than the twinkle of a tallow candle. An entire class of susceptibilities and a gift
connected with them, of no great richness or value but the best I had, was gone from me.
It is my belief, however, that had I attempted a different order of composition,
my faculties would not have been found so pointless and inefficacious.
I might, for instance, have contented myself with writing out the narratives of a veteran shipmaster,
one of the inspectors, whom I should be most ungrateful not to mention,
since scarcely a day passed that he did not stir me to laughter and admiration
by his marvellous gifts as a storyteller. Could I have preserved the picturesque force of his style
and the humorous colouring which nature taught him how to throw over his descriptions,
the result, I honestly believe, would have been something new in literature,
or I might readily have found a more serious task. It was a folly, with the materiality of this
daily life pressing so intrusively upon me, to attempt to fling myself back into another age,
or to insist on creating the semblance of a world out of airy matter, when, at every moment,
the impalpable beauty of my soap-bubble was broken by the rude contact of some actual circumstance.
The wiser effort would have been to diffuse thought and imagination through the opaque
substance of to-day, and thus to make it a bright transparency, to spiritualise the burden that
began to weigh so heavily, to seek, resolutely, the true and indestructible value that lay hidden
in the petty and wearisome incidents and ordinary characters, with which I was now conversant.
The fault was mine. The page of life that was spread out before me seemed dull and commonplace,
only because I had not fathomed its deeper import. A better book than I shall ever write was there,
leaf after leaf, presenting itself to me, just as it was written out by the reality of the flitting
and vanishing as fast as written, only because my brain wanted the insight and my hand the cunning
to transcribe it. At some future day, it may be, I shall remember a few scattered fragments and
broken paragraphs, and write them down, and find the letters turned to gold upon the page.
These perceptions have come too late. At the instant, I was only conscious that what would
have been a pleasure once was now a hopeless toil. There was no occasion to make much moan
about this state of affairs. I had ceased to be a writer of tolerably poor tales and essays,
and had become a tolerably good surveyor of the customs. That was all. But, nevertheless,
it is anything but agreeable to be haunted by a suspicion that one's intellect is dwindling away,
or exhaling without your consciousness like ether out of a file, so that, at every glance,
you find a smaller and less volatile residuum. Of the fact there could be no doubt, and examining
myself and others, I was led to conclusions in reference to the effect of public office on the
character not very favourable to the mode of life in question. In some other form, perhaps, I may
develop these effects. Suffice it here to say that a Custom House Officer of long continuance
can hardly be a very praiseworthy or respectable personage for many reasons.
One of them, the tenure by which he holds his situation, and another, the very nature of his
business, which, though I trust an honest one, is of such a sort that he does not share in the
I believe to be observable, more or less, in every individual who has occupied the position,
is that, while he leans on the mighty arm of the Republic, his own proper strength departs from him.
He loses, in an extent proportion to the weakness or force of his original nature,
the capability of self-support. If he possess an unusual share of native energy,
or the innovating magic of place do not operate too long upon him, his forfeited powers may be
redeemable. The ejected officer, fortunate in the unkindly shove that sends him forth betimes
to struggle amid a struggling world, may return to himself and become all that he has ever been.
But this seldom happens. He usually keeps his ground just long enough for his own ruin,
and is then thrust out, with sinews all unstrung, to totter along the difficult
footpath of life as best he may. Conscious of his own infirmity, that his tempered steel and
elasticity are lost, he, forever afterwards, looks wistfully about him in quest of support
external to himself. His pervading and continual hope, a hallucination, which, in the face of all
discouragement and making light of impossibilities, haunts him while he lives, and, I fancy, like the
convulsive throws of the cholera, torments him for a brief space after death, is that finally,
and in no long time, by some happy coincidence of circumstances, he shall be restored to office.
This faith, more than anything else, steals the pith and availability out of whatever enterprise
he may dream of undertaking. Why should he toil and moil, and be at so much trouble,
to pick himself up out of the mud, when, in a little while hence, the strong arm of his uncle
will raise and support him? Why should he work for his living here, or go to dig gold in California,
when he is so soon to be made happy at monthly intervals with a little pile of glittering coin
out of his uncle's pocket? It is sadly curious to observe how slight a taste of office suffices
to infect a poor fellow with this singular disease. Uncle Sam's gold, meaning no disrespect to the
worthy old gentleman, has, in this respect, a quality of enchantment like that of the devil's
wages. Whoever touches it should look well to himself, or he may find the bargain to go hard
against him, involving, if not his soul, yet many of its better attributes, its sturdy force,
its courage and constancy, its truth, its self-reliance, and all that gives the emphasis
to manly character. Here was a fine prospect in the distance, not that the surveyor brought the
lesson home to himself, or admitted that he could be so utterly undone, either by continuance in
Yet my reflections were not the most comfortable. I began to grow melancholy and restless,
continually prying into my mind to discover which of its poor properties were gone,
and what degree of detriment had already accrued to the remainder. I endeavoured to calculate how
much longer I could stay in the custom house and yet go forth a man. To confess the truth,
it was my greatest apprehension, as it would never be a measure of policy to turn out so quiet an
individual as myself, and it being hardly in the nature of a public officer to resign.
It was my chief trouble, therefore, that I was likely to grow grey and decrepit in the surveyership,
and become much such another animal as the old inspector. Might it not, in the tedious
to make the dinner hour the nucleus of the day, and to spend the rest of it as an old dog spends
it, asleep in the sunshine or the shade. A dreary look forward this for a man who felt it to be the
best definition of happiness, to live throughout the whole range of his faculties and sensibilities.
But all this while I was giving myself very unnecessary alarm.
Providence had meditated better things for me than I could possibly imagine for myself.
A remarkable event of the third year of my surveyership, to adopt the tone of PP,
was the election of General Taylor to the Presidency. It is essential in order to form
a complete estimate of the advantages of official life, to view the incumbent at the incoming of a
hostile administration. His position is then one of the most singularly irksome and in every
contingency disagreeable that a wretched mortal can possibly occupy, with seldom an alternative
of good on either hand, although what presents itself to him as the worst event may very probably
be the best. But it is a strange experience to a man of pride and sensibility, to know that his
interests are within the control of individuals who neither love nor understand him, and by whom,
since one or the other must needs happen, he would rather be injured than obliged.
Strange too for one who has kept his calmness throughout the contest to observe the blood
thirstiness that is developed in the hour of triumph, and to be conscious that he is himself
among its objects. There are few uglier traits of human nature than this tendency, which I now
witnessed in men no worse than their neighbours, to grow cruel merely because they possessed the
power of inflicting harm. If the guillotine as applied to office holders were a literal fact
instead of one of the most active metaphors, it is my sincere belief that the active members
of the victorious party were sufficiently excited to have chopped off all our heads,
and have thanked heaven for the opportunity. It appears to me, who have been a calm and curious
observer as well in victory as defeat, that this fierce and bitter spirit of malice and revenge
has never distinguished the many triumphs of my own party as it now did that of the Whigs.
The Democrats take the offices as a general rule because they need them, and because the practice
of many years has made it the law of political warfare which, unless a different system be
proclaimed, it will weakness and cowardice to murmur at. But the long habit of victory has made
them generous. They know how to spare when they see occasion, and when they strike the axe may be
sharp indeed, but its edge is seldom poisoned with ill-will, nor is it their custom ignominiously
to kick the head which they have just struck off. In short, and pleasant as was my predicament,
at best I saw much reason to congratulate myself that I was on the losing side, rather than the
triumphant one. If heretofore I had been none of the warmest of partisans, I began now at this
season of peril and adversity to be pretty acutely sensible with which party my predilections lay,
nor was it without something like regret and shame that, according to a reasonable calculation
of chances, I saw my own prospect of retaining office to be better than those of my Democratic
brethren. But who can see an inch into futurity beyond his nose? My own head was the first that
fell. The moment when a man's head drops off is seldom or never, I am inclined to think,
precisely the most agreeable of his life. Nevertheless, like the greater part of our
misfortunes, even so serious a contingency brings its remedy and consolation with it,
if the sufferer will but make the best, rather than the worst, of the accident which has befallen him.
In my particular case the consolatory topics were close at hand, and indeed had suggested
themselves to my meditations a considerable time before it was requisite to use them.
In view of my previous weariness of office and vague thoughts of resignation,
my fortune somewhat resembled that of a person who should entertain an idea of committing suicide,
and, altogether beyond his hopes, meet with a good hap to be murdered.
In the Custom House, as before in the Old Manse, I had spent three years, a time long enough to
rest a weary brain, long enough to break off old intellectual habits and make room for new ones,
long enough and too long to have lived in an unnatural state, doing what was really of no
advantage nor delight to any human being, and withholding myself from toil that would
at least have stilled an unquiet impulse in me. Then, moreover, as regarded his unceremonious
ejectment, the late Surveyor was not altogether ill-pleased to be recognised by the Whigs as an
enemy, since his inactivity in political affairs, his tendency to roam at will in that broad and
quiet field where all mankind may meet, rather than confine himself to those narrow paths
where brethren of the same household must diverge from one another, had sometimes made it
questionable with his brother Democrats whether he was a friend. Now, after he had won the Crown
of Martyrdom, though with no longer a head to wear it on, the point might be looked upon as
Finally, little heroic as he was, it seemed more decorous to be overthrown in the downfall of the
party with which he had been content to stand, than to remain a forlorn survivor when so many
worthier men were falling, and at last, after subsisting for four years on the mercy of a
hostile administration, to be compelled then to define his position anew and claim the yet more
humiliating mercy of a friendly one. Meanwhile the press had taken up my affair and kept me
for a week or two, careering through the public prints in my decapitated state like Irving's
headless horseman, ghastly and grim and longing to be buried as a politically dead man ought.
So much for my figurative self. The real human being, all this time with his head safely on his
shoulders, had brought himself to the comfortable conclusion that everything was for the best, and
making an investment in ink, paper and steel pens, had opened his long disused writing desk,
and was again a literary man. Now it was that the lucubrations of my ancient predecessor,
Mr. Surveyor Pugh, came into play. Rusty through long idleness, some little space was requisite
before my intellectual machinery could be brought to work upon the tale with an effect in any degree
satisfactory. Even yet, though my thoughts were ultimately much absorbed in the task,
it wears to my eye a stern and sombre aspect, too much ungladdened by genial sunshine,
too little relieved by the tender and familiar influences which soften almost every scene of
real life, and undoubtedly should soften every picture of them.
This uncaptivating effect is perhaps due to the period of hardly accomplished revolution
and still seething turmoil in which the story shaped itself. It is no indication, however,
of a lack of cheerfulness in the writer's mind, for he was happier while straying through the gloom of
fantasies than at any time since he had quitted the old manse. Some of the briefer articles which
contribute to make up the volume have likewise been written since my involuntary withdrawal
from the toils and honours of public life, and the remainders are gleaned from annuals and
magazines of such antique date that they have gone round the circle and come back to novelty again.
Keeping up the metaphor of the political guillotine, the whole may be considered as
the posthumous papers of a decapitated surveyor, and the sketch which I am now bringing to a close,
if too autobiographical for a modest person to publish in his lifetime,
will readily be excused in a gentleman who writes from beyond the grave.
Peace be with all the world, my blessing on my friends, my forgiveness to my enemies,
for I am in the realm of quiet. The life of the Custom House lies like a dream behind me.
The old Inspector, who by the by, I regret to say, was overthrown and killed by a horse some
time ago, else he would certainly have lived for ever, he and all those other venerable personages
who sat with him at the receipt of Custom are but shadows in my view, white-headed and wrinkled
images, which my fancy used to sport with, and has now flung aside for ever. The Merchants,
Pingree, Phillips, Shepherd, Upton, Kimble, Bertram, Hunt, these and many other names,
which had such a classic familiarity for my ear six months ago, these men of traffic,
who seem to occupy so important a position in the world, how little time has it required to
disconnect me from them all, not merely an act but recollection. It is with an effort that I
recall the figures and appellations of these few. Soon, likewise, my old native town will loom upon
me through the haze of memory, a mist brooding over and around it, as if it were no portion of
the real earth but an overgrown village in cloudland, with only imaginary inhabitants to
its wooden houses and walk its homely lanes, and the unpicturesque prolixity of its main street.
Henceforth it ceases to be a reality of my life. I am a citizen of somewhere else. My good townspeople
will not much regret me. For, though it has been as dear an object as any in my literary efforts
to be of some importance in their eyes, and to win myself a pleasant memory in this abode and
place of so many of my forefathers, there has never been for me the genial atmosphere which a
literary man requires in order to ripen the best harvest of his mind. I shall do better among other
faces, and these familiar ones, it need hardly be said, will do just as well without me.
It may be, however, all transporting and triumphant thought that the great-grandchildren
of the present race may sometimes think kindly of the scribbler of bygone days,
when the antiquary of days to come, among the sites memorable in the town's history,
shall point out the locality of the town pump.
End of part two of the Custom House